\section{Abstract}\label{abstract}

\section{Keywords}\label{keywords}

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

\section{Obervation: the Agile
Manifesto}\label{obervation-the-agile-manifesto}

The manifesto exposes 4 values written in the same
form:\\\textless{}X\textgreater{} over \textless{}Y\textgreater{}\\where
X is a value (or set of values) that comes other Y.

We will focus on X and have no discussion on Y in this paper.

\section{First value : Individuals and
interactions}\label{first-value-individuals-and-interactions}

In a development team, how can the code be a medium between individuals
and ease interactions?\\In an agile perspective (or an agile ideal), the
developement team, often mentionned as `the team', should include:
testers, ergonomists, front end developpers, back end devs, data
specialists, devOps engineers, technical leaders, architects and so on.

The aspect of sharing informations with the end users (and customers) is
discussed in the third value.

\subsubsection{The importance of Shared Language among
developpers}\label{the-importance-of-shared-language-among-developpers}

While a lot of practices, tools, recipes exists to emphase communication
between people in an agile IT environment, one major drawback is still
human language.\\The need of an ubiquitous, shared langugage is
absolutly vital between end users, business experts and people involved
in the production of the software deliveries.\\Because what is delivered
is what the software engineers did have understood.\\And most of all,
what is delivered is the result of code source, being compiled and
distributed, even on premises or on a cloud infrastructure.

Classical Agile methodologies often end on the side of project
management and requirement gathering (with the final aim of writing user
stories). But there's a lack of considerations about the code, which
still remains an obscure face of the long process of building software.

One must look for guidelines and practices beyond the Agile Manifesto,
hence use mostly common sense, or less known guidances such as Domain
Driven Development, coined and developped by Eric Evans

\begin{quote}
parler du glossaire!!!!\\et au dela: desambiguation, contresens, sens
cach√©, non sens
\end{quote}

Shared Language is modeled within a Limited context (so called bounded),
where the terms and concepts of the business domain are identified, and
there should be no ambiguity.

\subsection{Interactions inside the build
team}\label{interactions-inside-the-build-team}

Individuals and interactions are of course adressed in the Third value :
Customer collaboration.\\But what remains to explore are interactions
whithin the development team.\\Agility comes with a lot of innovations
in terms of having people working together more seamlessly and
fluently.\\How can this translate when it comes to code?

Code (source code) is not only what will be compiled and produces an
executable asset;\\Code has became more and more expressive, fluent.
Through the evolution of programing language (think about how an
assembly code looks like, it's barely unreadable for a human being) in
one hand, and the rise of better libraries, framework and
practices.\\Let's dive into more details:

\subsubsection{Code Readabilty}\label{code-readabilty}

The ability of reading fluently a source code come from multiple
factors:

\begin{itemize}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  speak the Ubiquitous Language of the bussiness and the clients : as
  said before it's a consequence of empowering interactions between
  stakeholders.\\
\item
  follow a design/conception that is close to the business needs:
  applying the recommandations of DDD, and name everything upon the
  Ubiquitous Language.
\end{itemize}

\subsubsection{Test understandably is at least as important as
code}\label{test-understandably-is-at-least-as-important-as-code}

On the way to share knowledge, code is an interesting vector, but it has
to be verified and behind code is another code: the code needed to
verify its behavior.\\In that sense, a better way to interact with and
priorly understand code is to read tests.\\Good Tests, written in the
TDD cycle of working, must express a clear intention (through exposing
clear ARRANGE and ACT steps) and also even more clear expectation (using
well expressed ASSERTIONS).\\We're talking about unit tests of course,
those close to the code.\\It is the exact location where we can verify
that the Ubiquituous appears in the naming of classes, properties and
method.\\It is where we can judge of the quality of code, the way it has
to be used;it reveals any flaws in the object design and the domain
rules and their cohesion.

As tests act as the first real user of the code, they prove a concrete,
verifiable interaction whith it.\\And they are error prone. Because on
one hand they compile (static type verification), then they pass! (they
have to).

Although those tests are code themselves, they are written by a human
being.\\One can think that tests are only written by developpers, but
not only.\\With the now acclaimed use of Agile practices such as User
Stories, Story Mapping {[}\^{}2{]}, Impact Mapping and so on, non
technicians are able to write acceptance tests, or behavior
expectations.\\Those expectations can lead directly to code through
Excecutable Specifications.\\They are to be written in a human readable
language, in a specific form using these keywords at the beginning of
each sentences (in English, but translatable to any dialect): Given /
When / Then.\\Then we associate (map) some code behind the natural
language, through the use of Regular Expressions.\\Many test libraries
allow to do that and target unit test code written in Java, C\#,
TypeScript, Java Script, PHP, Ruby, etc.\\The top library acheiving this
is Cucumber and there are many tools and test runtimes to make it work
in any CI/CD pipeline {[}\^{}1{]}. One can also use the Fitness
framework.

The observable result is that tests are now reflecting code, or at least
the Domain Model in the same form that it is expressed in code: events,
aggregates, even class names or abstraction names are trully and durably
in the code.\\And they are covariants. Always synchronised; otherwise
the code cannot compile and the tests cannot pass.

Further more, when we mention unit testing, or technical tests, it
expresses what developpers have understood about the domain and its
subtleness.

With those processes (tests and code together written as a base to
interact between stakeholders), we are acheiving one most precious thing
in the art of software development: a \emph{Single Source of Trust}.

And a way to talk between technicians and non technicians about the
expected behavior of what is to be delivered.

\subsubsection{Pair Programming \& Mob
Programming}\label{pair-programming-mob-programming}

\ldots{}\ldots{} . . . . . .

\subsubsection{Code Repository (sharing)}\label{code-repository-sharing}

l'outil de repository , et les outils de code review\\voir outil
Themis\\\ldots{}\ldots{} . . . . . .

\subsubsection{Code Reviews and metrics}\label{code-reviews-and-metrics}

Individuals (the coders) havre also they own channel to discuss.\\We're
not going to talk about tools. As they still are many and other studies
exist to discuss their usage.

The coders are in perpetual interaction each other when they write, read
and fix code.\\Source code, as I said, is a vector.\\A vector of shared
knowledge, but also intentions.\\That's why code review is an important
interaction whithin the members of the team around the code.\\It's a
time where people should discuss is the problem has properly been
understood and if the solution is viable and

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\\\ldots{}
\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\\\ldots{}
\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\\\ldots{}
\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\\\ldots{}
\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsubsection{Architecture Decision
Records}\label{architecture-decision-records}

Although we are going to discuss a form of documentation, it is
important to remember that Architecture and code are conversations in
first place.\\Then, those conversations needs to be recorded.

\begin{quote}
cf Quick Design Session: Xtreme Programming
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
caser les C4 et UML ici
\end{quote}

The Architecture Decision Records (ADR) are actually not really about
documenting the current, or future, state of an application
architecture, but instead the reasons that led to it. They are specially
important because they intend to tell others, and our future selves, why
the architecture, therefore the code, is as it is.

An ADR is a log entry about the architecture decisions that have been
made and that lead to the state of the architecture as it is now or as
it is intended to be in the future. They contain the why behind the the
diagrams that describe the architecture.

ADR are written in a simple MarkDown (MD) language.

To start, there are a few artefacts that we need to know:

Architecturally-Significant Requirement (ASR): a requirement that has a
measurable effect on a software system's architecture;\\Architecture
Decision (AD): a software design choice that addresses a significant
requirement;\\Architecture Decision Record (ADR): a document that
captures an important architectural decision made along with its context
and consequences;\\Architecture Decision Log (ADL): the collection of
all ADRs created and maintained for a particular project (or
organisation);\\Architecture Knowledge Management (AKM): the higher
sphere of all previous concepts.

\subsection{When Interactions falls into a trap: it's all about
(external)
dependencies}\label{when-interactions-falls-into-a-trap-its-all-about-external-dependencies}

While we're talking about interactions, there are other that lie on the
dark side of the projet, hidden in the cellar.\\Namely: the
dependencies.\\While business experts talk about behavior, expectations,
policies, rules\ldots{} engineer are still facing the technologie that
come into pieces: programming languages, framework, libraries, external
services, APIs, 3rd party software, external ressources, hardware
links\ldots{}

Those dependencies add complexity in the dialog between stakeholders.

(to be continued ?)

\begin{center}\rule{3in}{0.4pt}\end{center}

\section{Second value : Working software \& Working on
Software}\label{second-value-working-software-working-on-software}

How can we ensure that the software is working?

\subsection{Define What is Working?}\label{define-what-is-working}

a program that build : Product Right\\a program that fulfills the user
needs : Right Product

\begin{quote}
Clean Code that Works (Kent Beck)
\end{quote}

\subsection{Working on Software}\label{working-on-software}

\begin{quote}
Not only working software but also well crafted software ()
\end{quote}

Code bien √©crit pour bien travailler dessus\\(rejoint l'aspect
collaboration )

SOLID\\KISS\\DRY

\subsection{Test pour valider ? ou test pour
verifier?}\label{test-pour-valider-ou-test-pour-verifier}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

Tests pour refactorer

\subsection{The need for automation in
test}\label{the-need-for-automation-in-test}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}code = test / test = code
\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{} spec = test / test = spec ?

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsubsection{The tests pyramid}\label{the-tests-pyramid}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

Conclusion: automated verification are code! They shall obey the same
rules.

\subsection{Behaviour Driven : let's start verification: executable
specification}\label{behaviour-driven-lets-start-verification-executable-specification}

\subsubsection{End 2 End tests are not Behaviour Driven or Acceptance
Tests}\label{end-2-end-tests-are-not-behaviour-driven-or-acceptance-tests}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\begin{center}\rule{3in}{0.4pt}\end{center}

\section{Third value : Customer
collaboration}\label{third-value-customer-collaboration}

\begin{quote}
Right Product
\end{quote}

What are the elements that the code and the developement team can reveal
to improve collaboration with the Customers?

\subsection{Behaviour Driven : let's start
conversations}\label{behaviour-driven-lets-start-conversations}

BDD\\ \ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\begin{quote}
Based on an Ubiquitous Language
\end{quote}

As mentionned in the 1st principle of collaboration over processes,
people will understand each other in a better way if they speak the same
language.\\More than the native tongue, it is also important to agree on
the meaning behind terms and acronyms.\\In that sense, and to avoid a
lot of unproductive meeetings, it is interesting to involve end users
and domain experts into the process of co-creation.\\For that, they need
to build a common glossary and progress on disambiguate any term or
concept coming from the business/end user side.\\The aim is to discuss,
research, conceptualize, develop and speak the Ubiquitous Language of
the Domain Model.

\subsection{}\label{section}

\subsubsection{Event Storming as a way to extended interaction \&
collaboration throughout the design
phase}\label{event-storming-as-a-way-to-extended-interaction-collaboration-throughout-the-design-phase}

One very efficient way is the Event Storming (or more recently moved in
Event Modeling) meeting.\\It brings togethers those who have the
knowledge of the business concerns, the needs of the customers, but also
the imperative of regulations or law inforcements with the ones in
charge of the development and the integration of the product with other
systems (the technical parts). In that mutual exercise they simply
discuss and share higly valuable knowledge while producing artefacts
that will become the angular stone of the code.

Those ertefacts are: Aggregates of information, views of the model,
views of the future HMI, policies, events in a timeline, commands and
systems.\\They are not complete, just a sketch, but enough to start
coding and most important an ongoing conversation between stakeholders.

\subsection{ATDD and BDD}\label{atdd-and-bdd}

Another form of collaboration is to involve the End Users and the Domain
Experts in the inception of verification.

``What comes out in production is what the developers have
understood''\\\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsection{Domain Modeling}\label{domain-modeling}

As seen in chapter of ``Event Storming'', what comes right next after a
Workshop where ideas emerge, is to catpure the shared knowledge into a
tangible and applicable model.\\On can be attached to UML modeling while
others prefer putting it down directly to code.\\There's many tools that
handle reverse direction mapping between code and a model like UML\\In
fact, there's is no reason that code and model should be seperated. They
hold the same information.\\As duplicating information is an absolute
anti pattern, one should choose wich should master and be the reference
for the design: either the UML representation, or the code.

Benefit of the code: it is compiled easily and quickly, thus verified
again

\subsection{Tactical DDD}\label{tactical-ddd}

\subsubsection{Domain Core}\label{domain-core}

\subsubsection{Domain Aggregates}\label{domain-aggregates}

\subsubsection{Value Objets}\label{value-objets}

\subsection{Human Readable
Verification}\label{human-readable-verification}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\begin{center}\rule{3in}{0.4pt}\end{center}

\section{Fourth value : Responding to
change}\label{fourth-value-responding-to-change}

How can the code help us to facilitate any responses to change?

Quote: ``Make the change easy, the make the easy change'' (Kent Beck).

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsection{SOLID principles are
vitals}\label{solid-principles-are-vitals}

\subsubsection{allow and minimize impacts of
change}\label{allow-and-minimize-impacts-of-change}

\subsubsection{Pattern are usefull to enforce
SOLID}\label{pattern-are-usefull-to-enforce-solid}

\subsection{Feedback Loops}\label{feedback-loops}

\subsubsection{Contract based testing}\label{contract-based-testing}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsection{Why code is difficult to
change}\label{why-code-is-difficult-to-change}

Explain here the connascence
problema.\\\url{https://www.maibornwolff.de/en/blog/connascence-rules-good-software-design}

In the common sense, connascence is the act of growing together.\\In the
code, it is the relationship between two or more elements (packages,
components, classes or functions) in which changing one necessitates
changing the others in order to maintain overall correctness.

\begin{itemize}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  illustration
\end{itemize}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsection{Architectures enabling
changes}\label{architectures-enabling-changes}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

Hexagonal Architecture

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\subsection{Evolutions in software}\label{evolutions-in-software}

When changes are evolution, how to cope with it?\\( √† voir ?????)

\section{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\ldots{} \ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}\ldots{}

\begin{center}\rule{3in}{0.4pt}\end{center}

\section{(√† d√©placer qq part)
Motivation}\label{a-deplacer-qq-part-motivation}

\subsubsection{Breaking the monolith of design \& conception
phase}\label{breaking-the-monolith-of-design-conception-phase}

Traditional software project management guidelines (Waterfall, RUP) tend
to avoid live interactions between the various actors of a project: from
user to late end validators and receiptors, only a heavy and cheesy
documentation was allowed. And all things must be expressed as a whole,
a monolith; rarely in terms of increment.\\Agile methodologies arrived
to change this. But how the design and conception phased is durably
impacted?

While going to discover the product backlog and its refinement through
user stories, the need of design \& conception process was still on the
urge.

While some XP (eXtreme Programming) supporters said that one has just to
code the solution (which is quite acceptable if you have the end user or
the skateholders fully involved in the whole construction of the
software), the vast majority still needs to express intermediates
between User Stories and the code.

Thus, Agile practices encourage more human readable, and interactions
prone, artefacts such as:

\begin{itemize}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Express User Stories in a form using BDD / Gherkin / Cucumber\\
\item
  Acceptance (Tests) Driven Development\\
\item
  Executable Specification
\end{itemize}

But also C4 Models (to move accross high level use case, architectural
views, and code implementations) and traditionnal UML diagramms are
still good candidates to encourage intense discussion with the
stakeholders and the builder of the project/product.

\section{References}\label{references}
